hello and welcome
to night sky news with me astrophysicist
dr becky smethus
this is the monthly series where we
recap everything that's been going on in
space and astronomy news
over the past month but first let's chat
about what you can look out for in the
night sky
in the coming month
all right so usually we do this bit in
chronological order but i'm throwing
that out of the window this month
because i want to talk about something
that's
so exciting first and that is saturn and
jupiter coming within 0.1 degrees of
each other on the sky
on the solstice on the 21st of december
that's really close together in the sky
that's about a fifth of the width of the
full
moon and this hasn't happened that
they've come this close at least from
earth's perspective
since 1623 and it won't happen again
until march 2018 so you better catch it
while you can
so even as this video goes up on
thursday the 17th of december they will
be about 0.5 degrees apart in the sky
which is about the width
of a full moon so if you can spot them
tonight and then watch them getting
closer and closer over the next couple
of days that would be a really nice
thing to do
plus tonight on thursday there's a
toenail moon near to them as well so you
know that i'm gonna be looking out for
them because that's my favorite thing
now you need to look for them in the
southwest roughly in the direction you
can see the sunset
just after it's gone dark and this is
true if you're in the northern or the
southern hemisphere you know wherever
you are in the world
here's the key thing though the closer
you are to the tropic of capricorn
the higher they're going to be in the
sky just after the sun sets and
therefore the longer the amount of time
they will be in the sky
before they also then set here in the uk
for example they're only going to be
about 10 degrees above the horizon after
the sunset so if you hold out your
hand arms width and sort of do the
little rock on symbol that's about
10 degrees so you need quite a high
vantage point so a high window or a
hilltop or something like that
and they're going to have set by six
o'clock here in the uk as well so this
is something you really do have to catch
while you can whereas if you're on the
tropic of capricorn
like for example alice springs in
australia they'll be about 25 degrees
above the horizon so that's you know
above roofs of houses and it won't set
until like
9 00 p.m so you'll have plenty of chance
to spot it in fact if you're in
australia anywhere in australia i'm
quite jealous because
first of all you'll probably have
brilliant weather to actually be able to
see this but you'll also have the best
view of it but wherever you are in the
world i have put a link in the
description to timeanddate.com and
that'll tell you
uh how high jupiter and saturn are going
to be in the sky for you
and also what time they'll set as well
so you actually have chance of seeing
this
of seeing them maybe merged to looking
like one
object in the sky it's being called the
the christmas conjunction obviously
because of its coincidence
with christmas as well and it's just
going to be a really spectacular sight
if you have binoculars and telescopes
this is the time to break them out all
right so we've got a fair few of the
other planets visible in the night sky
through december as well including mars
which is
very high in the sky right now looking
very bright
and very reddish and very mars like if
you want to spot it look towards the
southeast just after sunset
so out of whatever window in your house
gets the morning sun
and then you can watch it move across
the night sky throughout the night and
it'll set in the east
around about the wee hours of the
morning so it's in the night sky for a
really nice
long time at the minute so good chances
to spot it
and then if you're more of a morning
person you've got venus again
in the southeast so looking at whatever
window in your house gets the morning
sun
and that will be just before dawn it's
incredibly bright venus one of the
brightest things in the night sky so it
always looks particularly beautiful
especially in that early morning light
and i have to say it would be something
really nice for the family to do
together maybe on christmas morning if
your kids maybe get you up incredibly
early so that you
are up before the sun is it's a nice
thing to do together
speaking of christmas morning i want all
of the kids out there to be
very very careful this christmas because
i don't want you to mistake the
international space station
for father christmas's sleigh it's very
bright and it moves
quite fast across the sky so a lot of
people
will be very easily convinced that it is
santa claus but of course you guys will
know better so for example in the uk
on christmas morning the international
space station is going to pass overhead
about five past seven in the morning so
if you
are up very early perhaps your kids get
you up before
the sunrise it could be a very good
thing
to look out for wherever you are in the
world though i'll put a link in the
description below that'll let you put in
your location
and see if there are any uh passovers of
the international space station
over your area perhaps on christmas eve
or on christmas day
as well but remember don't mistake it
for father christmas
all right as beautiful as the night sky
is let's move on and see what's been
happening this month
in space news
all right let's start with a story that
probably doesn't even deserve to be here
because let's be honest it's not
astrophysics it's not even
science this is frankly quite bizarre
story
about the galactic federation if you
haven't heard
the ex-chief of israel's space security
programme
heim eshed has come out and said that a
galactic federation of intelligent
extraterrestrials has been in contact
with humanity specifically just the us
and israel and has now started doing
experiments about the nature of the
universe here on earth
and in a base on mars where there are
currently both aliens and humans
living there they would not like the
entirety of humanity to know about this
yet because apparently humanity is not
ready
now first off science is about
evidence-based
research and this is not an
evidence-based research
story right at all it's just the word of
one man and as much as i would love to
believe and would be quite happy to
believe that there is a federation of
intelligent extraterrestrials out there
and much as i would probably also
believe that they don't think humanity
is somehow evolved enough
to join it that's just too much politics
that's part of this story
to even make it believable in any way
the thing that did it for me is that
this guy's got a book coming out so
my working hypothesis as a scientist
is that well it's a marketing ploy and
so as cool and as believable as a
galactic federation of extraterrestrials
might be um until there's any evidence
let's not talk about it again and shall
we talk about some real science
instead so last week we also saw
spacex's latest test
of starship a reusable super heavy lift
launch vehicle okay a rocket
being developed to eventually replace
their current reusable rocket the falcon
9 which eventually should be able to
land itself in that same
incredibly crazy amazing way so the idea
is that it should be able to do
both satellite launches into low earth
orbit and also human launch into low
earth orbit to places like the
international space station
but also it should be able to do human
space flight beyond the earth moon
system so we're talking about
mars and maybe beyond who knows so
they've done a couple of tests of this
already last week's was the eighth
test and the first like high altitude
test they've done as well
so they sent it up to about 12 500
meters about 41 000 feet and brought it
back down again all in the space of
about
six and a half minutes and the way that
this
vehicle actually comes back down is
really what's so
novel and ingenuitive about this whole
system
a lot of people have described it as
like it's
belly flopping back down um it reminds
me personally of like buzz lightyear
this isn't blind this is falling with
style
it then burns one of its engines to sort
of rewrite itself to the vertical and
essentially slows its descents that it
can land
back on the launch pad essentially which
is incredible this whole reusable rocket
technology blows my mind it's such an
amazing feat of engineering
however the test last week didn't
exactly
go to plan and it ended a little bit
more spectacularly than they were
expecting because
they couldn't reduce its velocity enough
and essentially it crashed and
exploded in a fiery poof ball it was so
much fun watching it live because it was
so unexpected as well and like
i was watching it from bed because it
was like 11 p.m here so i didn't exactly
get to sleep easily after watching it
just
explode on the launch pad for those of
you worried about
wasting taxpayer money though from
explosions don't worry this is mostly
actually a privately funded
venture nasa has chipped in a little bit
but the majority of it
is coming from private funds and also it
wasn't
a waste either the fact that it exploded
the the test really here
was the high altitude test it was
actually really the flight more than
anything and they
got all the data they needed from the
flight and to be honest they probably
learned more from the failed landing
than they actually did a successful
landing so this is
science and engineering like in real
time and it is just
absolutely fascinating to watch there
was another disaster
this month unfortunately and this one
wasn't a prototype it was an
astronomical
legend this was the moment that the
arecibo telescope in puerto rico
collapsed
now as an astronomer that has used data
from that telescope that clip
is absolutely horrific to watch it's
like watching the opening scene of
gravity where they just destroy the
hubble space telescope in a matter of
minutes
except it's real it's just
such a blow to the astrophysics research
community
and the community in puerto rico as well
so for some context the rsibo telescope
is a 305
meter or a thousand feet radio telescope
in puerto rico it was built
back in the 60s which ever since has
been making some
incredible science possible i've used it
before to measure the gas mass in
galaxies so for example hydrogen gas
actually
gives out radio waves a very specific
wavelength of light 21 centimeters that
arecibo can
detect and so i used it in my thesis to
compare like how much mass is there in
stars and how much mass is there in
gas mass that could be used to make more
stars and stuff like that it also
um was the telescope that gave us the
first sort of concrete evidence for
neutron stars when it observed um
the crab nebula and the crab pulsar at
the very center
that was giving off radio waves with a
period of 33
milliseconds it's also been used by seti
as well the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence you know they're using it
to
to search through any of the radio
detections they make for signals that
might have been sent by intelligent life
forms
plus it was even used in the bond film
goldeneye
and in contact as well with jodie foster
which incidentally is a film i have
never seen
i've been told that is a terrible
terrible thing that i have never seen it
so
i was thinking maybe i should do one of
my astrophysicist reacts videos let me
know in the comments if you'd like to
see that
but anyway there was some minor damage
done to arecibo uh during the 2017
hurricane season
including in the wake of hurricane maria
as well
and then in august 2020 one of the
cables from one of the towers actually
holding up the detector of the telescope
essentially where all the light from
that big dish
is focused above it that broke and
caused huge
damage to that big dish and i talked
about in my instagram stories
last month about how there was a plan in
place to actually
fix that damage and actually replace the
cable but before they could replace the
cable one of the
other main cables this time supporting
that detector above the telescope dish
broke and caused even more
damage and at that point the engineers
were sent in to
assess the situation and they concluded
that it just
would not be safe for them to even try
to fix it anymore i think the original
plan was to sort of have them
abseiling out of helicopters and sort of
dangling above the dish
to try and fix it and it was at that
point that the nsf back in november the
national science foundation who
manages arecibo telescope decided to
decommission the telescope and ever
since then they've obviously been
monitoring it very closely they've been
noticing that um smaller cables like a
couple of them have been breaking each
day
so they knew that it was close to
collapse so they put in sort of a safe
zone around it made sure that there was
no one in the area so no one could be
hurt
when it did collapse and so when it did
i mean well they were ready
so they even managed to get drone
footage when it very sadly
finally came crashing down
all right should we have some happier
astrophysics news now
can we get back to politics please this
month saw the
huge data release from the european
space agencies or esa's
gaia mission which is essentially
attempting to map the
positions the distances and the motions
of over a billion objects in our night
sky and so
the majority of those are stars in the
milky way but also you've got some
comets and some asteroids in the solar
system and also some planets as well
that gaia is monitoring but also uh some
extra galactic quasars as well you know
because you've got to keep us
supermassive black hole fans happy you
know
the idea is to essentially create an
incredibly precise map of the positions
of billions of stars in the milky way
but if you also measure their velocities
then you get their motions as well
and with their motions we get a glimpse
into how the milky way as a whole and
the star and planet systems within it
have evolved to their current state but
also what might happen
in the future so there's been lots of
really cool signs that's come out of the
previous two
gaia data releases as well including um
the gaia sausage which i talked about
with brady over on his channel deep sky
videos
then there was also the antilla 2 galaxy
that was discovered back in 2018
and that was like a little companion
galaxy milky way of about 10 000 stars
and it was the faintest galaxy that had
ever been discovered and then of course
we had the radcliffe wave came from gaia
data as well this was this like sign
wave of gas that was running through one
of the spiral arms near the sun
which i talked about in a video back in
january
2020 you know back in simpler times and
the data dump from gaia this time as
well this third data release
has also not disappointed here is its
latest map of the sky which shows the
position of over
1.8 billion sources an increase of about
100 million on the previous data
released
and this release also has color
information on the stars too so you can
see how there's a lot of color
in this map the color tells you about
the style that you are actually
observing
but it also has more info on the
movements of stars at the very edge of
our galaxy too
and one of the first big pieces of
science has obviously been done by the
guy at collaboration you know they get
first access to the data so one of the
results that came out of this was led by
cleona
and what they did was they measured the
speed of the solar system
with respect to the rest frame of the
universe
so it's really difficult to measure the
speed that the sun is going around the
milky way when obviously everything else
around us
is also moving as well and it's also
obviously in the center of the milky way
there's nothing stationary to
measure your speed with respect to but
do you remember those extra galactic
quasars that i was talking about before
well with those you can sort of
triangulate your position you can sort
of triangulate the speed that you're
moving
with respect to those as long as you
also know uh
their positions and their motions
incredibly accurately which you also
get from gaia it's like they did this on
purpose and they thought about this
beforehand and what they found is that
the sun or the solar systems it orbits
the center of our galaxy
speeds up it accelerates by about 0.2
nanometers per second squared which
means that every second it speeds up by
another 0.2 nanometers a second
and what that means is essentially as
the uh sun
it moves on its trajectory it gets
deflected by about the width
of an atom every second which doesn't
sound like much but over a year that
actually adds up to about 115 kilometers
and so what they've been able to isolate
here is not just the fact that the sun
is moving and moving in some direction
but actually been able to isolate the
fact that it
is curving it's actually on an orbit
roughly circular
around the center of the milky way and i
really liked how this result
tied in very nicely with another result
that came out this month
this one from the japanese vlbi radio
astronomy telescope
vera it's one of these huge rays of
antenna that give you super detailed
resolution because you essentially make
like a 2 000 kilometer wide
telescope so they were also trying to
get very precise positions of objects in
the sky but unlike gaia which did it for
like
1.8 billion stars these have done it for
mazes and if you're just thinking becky
you malfunctioned did you mean to say
laser i didn't i meant to say
mazer it's just a very specific type of
laser so light laser is an acronym which
stands for
light amplification by stimulated
emission of radiation
maser stands for microwave amplification
by
stimulated emission of radiation so it's
just a very specific type of laser
that's in the microwave regime of the
electromagnetic
spectrum so essentially what a maser is
it's a clump of gas that contains
probably like water
or methanol or formaldehyde or something
like that and what you do is you can
sort of shine radiation
on it perhaps like uv light or x-rays or
something like that and it can be
encouraged or
stimulated to emit microwaves and when
it does that it's an incredibly
incredibly
bright emission line in the microwave so
it's nice and easy to be able to observe
and it means that
because it's so bright you can get very
precise positions from it using these
big
radio antenna and they're very common uh
in the sort of gas
around like a supermassive black hole so
what we call the accretion disk where
the gas is spiraling around it but also
you find them
dotted along the milky way's spiral arms
as well so they're a really good way
to sort of map out the positions of
things and also
work out you know distances to things as
well in terms of like
how far is the sun away from the
supermassive black hole
in the center of the milky way and so
that's exactly what they've done here
they've essentially been
able to find the position of the sun in
the milky way with respect to the very
center of the galaxy and the
supermassive black hole there
to you know the most accuracy and
precision that we've ever been able to
do it before
which means we've obviously revised our
estimate for
how far are we away from the center of
the galaxy and essentially it's put us
about
2 000 light years closer than we thought
which means that because we're closer in
we're orbiting a little bit
faster than we thought as well by about
seven kilometers
a second now i've seen a lot of
headlines that's like
the sun has moved closer to the black
hole the sun has not moved right this
one is in the same place as it was
before we've just revised our
measurement
of where it is it's like did you see the
news this month about how they'd revised
the estimate for how tall everest was
they basically added about
86 centimeters to the height everest did
not grow
86 centimeters overnight right it was
just that our measurement of it
changed and it's the same thing here and
you don't need to worry either about the
fact that you know
we are orbiting a supermassive black
hole because that's fine we're orbiting
it we're in a very stable
orbit we're too far away to you know get
sucked into a black hole it doesn't mean
we're going to fall into
a black the black hole at the center of
the milky way the same way the earth
is happily orbiting the sun right it is
not
spiraling into the sun it is not falling
into the sun
either it's not going to end up in the
sun right it's happily orbiting it in
the same way the sun
and the solar system are happily
orbiting the center of the milky way
where there just happens to be
a supermassive black hole and one of the
things that i'm hoping for for 2021
is an image of that super massive black
hole at the center of the milky way just
like we got for
m87 last year i have got my fingers
crossed
that that is on the cards for 2021. all
right that's it from me this week and
for this year as well i'll be back in
january with more fun space videos but
until then i'm going to be having a nice
rest over the christmas break if you
celebrate christmas
merry christmas please stay safe out
there whilst you're having fun and do
everything you can to protect your
family on a happier note
happy new year everyone to i'm gonna say
it now
here's to 2021 and hopefully all of the
really exciting space news that's to
come
this video is sponsored by brilliant
brilliant is a problem-solving website
with a
huge range of courses across all areas
of science and maths
that are really interactive and fun as
well they essentially teach you by
getting you to think logically like a
scientist
so if you want to know more about the
methods that gaia mission is using to
for example get distances to stars in
the milky way
then check out this module on parallax
as part of their astronomy course
or if you want to know why gaia is
bothering to record the colors of stars
check out this module on the hr diagram
the hertzbang russell diagram and you'll
learn all about
how and why color is related to star
size
if that sounds like something you'd be
up for then head over to brilliant.org
forward slash dr becky that's
d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free plus the
first 200 people that go to that link
will get 20
off an annual premium subscription so
i've put the link
in the description below if you click on
it it essentially lets them know
that i sent you so head over there and
treat yourself
to some new knowledge all right so
usually i do this bit in chronological
chronic chronological order
chronological and the idea is that it
should be able to do
but oh hello little jingle bell little
jingle jingle there for you
41 thousand feet and then brought it
back to gown
down to the blue and they got all the
data they needed
from that testers bloody motorbike
do you mind where could you possibly be
going
keep an eye on the sky to see if there
are any extraterrestrials trying to
communicate
communicate instead of light
amplifying whatever laser stands for it
stands for
what does maser stand for it definitely
microwave i think what does laser stand
for